I am going to give you a puzzle.
A pretty famous puzzle.
Let’s see if you can solve it!
Do you remember these Harry Potter Books?
Seven world-famous books?
Those books are arranged in order.
From 1 to 7, in a book shelf like this.
A bookworm… not the “bookworm” — the
guy or the girl who keeps reading books — not
them — but a real worm.
The silverfish.
It starts from the first page of the first
book and eats through to the last page of
the last book.
The page counts of each book, 1 to 7, go like
this.
The question to you is “How many pages does
the bookworm eat through?”
Can you let me know?!
Vanakkam.
Four Hundred and Forty Two.
I have called it “Putthagam”.
And, I went looking.
Pudhu Agam.
Pudhuagam.
Putthagam.
We are entering into a new world.
A new home.
Could be!
What do you say?!
If you delve into the origin, you will realise
that it is Potthagam.
There were a lot of HOLES.
In the papyrus/parchment.
Holes made by the writing instrument.
That is where the name comes from.
Putthagam.
I have..
I have to confess really..
I have a lifelong love affair with books.
Any book I get my hands on anywhere, I used
to grab, read, and share.
Once upon a time, believe it or not, running
out of space in my home to accommodate all
the books I had collected, we rented a house,
a 1bhk apartment nearby just to dump the books
that I had collected over the years.
I have learned the lesson now, .. but, that
was how bad things were once upon a time.
Books are really a porthole.
A pathway to a new world.
That author’s world.
Probably the time the author lived in.
Or, the world the author created for us.
Like Lord of the Rings, probably.
All of us, as children, we would have obsessed
over picture-books.
And then, we start realising that our imagination
can provide better pictures.
A child matures.
A child has grown up.
The very indication of this happening is when
the child moves from complaining “Hey, this
book has no pictures in it!”
to “Hey, why does this book have pictures
in it!”
I still remember Bram Stoker’s Dracula.
That book had just words.
White paper.
Black writing.
English letters.
Just 26 letters.
But the scene that they depict, that they
recreate in my mind, I have watched so many
movies and TV series after that, but nothing
can hold a candle to the world that I created
myself, the world the author created for me
in my mind.
Nothing can come close.
I am sure you agree too.
Books takes you to a world of their own.
In today’s world, the high-tension low-attention-span
world, I think books are the last remaining
place where the whole story is told, but you
have to grind through in your own pace.
You can’t speed it up.
Like you do in YouTube, 2x video speed..
Nor can you shake the mouse a bit and check
the red progress bar and find out how much
more there is before the end.
However interesting and engrossing the video
might be..
I hate it when some people do that!
This particular movie, a short movie, just
seven minutes, called Paperman!
I was playing this for a friend, and we wouldn’t
have crossed even half way, and they wanted
to move the mouse already!
How much more to go??
An antidote for this kind of disease?
Is the book.
The whole story is laid out there.
Chapter by chapter.
It is waiting to unfold for you.
But, it will happen only in the speed with
which you read.
You control the speed.
You can jump back.
You can pause.
You can think.
You can resume.
The story will wait.
While thinking about the author, I also sometimes
feel the author must be … just like this
man.
Twitter.
Facebook.
“Insta”Gram.
This is the world we are growing up in.
We get immediate feedback.
We say something, and we get immediate feedback.
If we post a blog on Medium, we get an applause
soon afterward.
So that we can change immediately.
Imagine the plight of the author!
They write the whole story with zero feedback.
They don’t have any idea who is going to
like the story.
They don’t have any idea whether they are
going to find a hole in the plot, whether
they are going to complain that the heroine
was cheated and misled.
No!
They have no idea!
What a huge challenge this is!
To do something for so long, spend so much
time on, and create it in your own personal
private world, without any feedback, and then
you give it out into the world.
Amazing!
When you look at the evolution of the book,
.. it all started almost five thousand years
ago.
On a stone tablet, people learned how to make
etchings and marks.
Then, parchment and papyrus, found in the
banks of the River Nile, people found that
they could be pressed together, and you could
write on top of them.
They lasted for a long time.
Then, they used the skin of young animals,
like calf skin, they started writing on parchment.
Then along came paper and basic printing.
Movable type.
We could compose letters and print them and
so we could mass manufacture them into multiple
copies.
Till then, books were hand-copied.
Only the rich people had access to it.
But when this happened, Gutenberg’s printing
press arrived, for the first time, people,
common man could have access to all kinds
of books and writing.
Then, the paperback — the small hand-held
pocket book arrived.
And only then, people started taking books
along with them, wherever they went.
Till then, it was in a library.
With a special X-shaped book-holder.
Then, around 1985, the concept of an ebook.
A tablet.
Digitally stored.
In 2007, 2011, we got the iPad.
But, around 1985, the concept of an electronic
book that could store the book digitally was
born.
And, innovations-wise, one very interesting
innovation is the audio-book.
Audible.com was launched as a service in 1995,
and we were able to hear a book instead of
reading it.
Great evolution.
Even after such a long journey, some people
still say, “Nothing like a paper-book!
Sorry!”
I may be making some enemies today, but I
am going to tell you some of the reasons why
I think people should move to the world of
digital.
To the world of bits.
Two things that people often say — citing
these as the primary reasons why they haven’t
switched over to digital books.
I used to ask a lot of my friends.
And, they would shrug and say, “Sorry, I
prefer paperbooks!”
They give two reasons.
Reason number one is — Irritation to the
eyes.
We need to reduce screen time, you see, they
would quip.
The answer to them is, Hey, reduce Instagram
time, reduce Facebook infinite dumb scrolling
time.
Which one?
Have you forgotten the jar with rocks already?
Would anybody in their senses really stop
reading because of eye strain?!
That would be my instant response.
The second reason they often quote is, “The
smell that comes when I take it close to my
nose..
Can you reproduce that?!”
There is even a word for it.
That smell.
That odd smell that comes through the spine
of the book when you keep it close to your
nose.
It is an addiction, my friend.
Like when people get addicted to smelling
markers because it has a volatile compound
called toluene in it.
Similarly, this has glue, and it reacts with
the paper, and it is an ADDICTION!
The first thought that strikes me whenever
somebody brings up the “special unique smell
of moldy books” is.. the instant reaction
from me is..
“What do you want to know about Dr. Albert
Einstein?
Do you want to know the inner workings of
the Theory of Relativity?
Or do you want to smell the perfume he had
before he went for a lecture!?”
Why are you buying books, my dear?
Just to smell them??
By the way, here are four reasons why I think
the electronic format, the digital format,
is far far better.
Reason Number One?
You can take it wherever you want.
You can take it wherever you go.
Because it occupies zero space.
Literally zero space.
At any point of time, I am reading probably
nine to ten books.
A book with my mom.
A book with my son.
Three / Four books with the students at Zoho
Schools.
A book all for myself.
And, also, a book through audio format.
But, I can do that wherever I am, because,
electronic books.
And, what about Searchability?
In a particular book, a particular author,
at a particular location, would have used
a word.
Can you spot that location for me?
You paper-folks?!
Can you locate it?
Probably you’ll remember, somewhere in the
first half, etc.
But, can you search across all the seven books?
Can you search and tell me, in the Harry Potter
Seven Book Collection, which is the first
time that the Avada Kedavra Curse is used?
I dare you!
You can’t!
That searchability comes only when it is truly
digital.
And, in this Knowledge Age, Information Age,
the proof that you have really read and assimilated
something comes when you remember it, recall
it, chew cud on it back again.
Otherwise you are not deriving the full benefit
of having read a book.
The third reason is, it stays forever!
A paper book bends, tears, deteriorates.
I even remember during college times — we
used to take xerox copies of books.
And, once, along came an inspiring kid who
said he would take a xerox copy of a xerox
copy.
Quality suffered.
We couldn’t make out the letters.
But, in the digital world, once a book is
created, it will stay forever.
I remember an author on TV once..
About a book he had written about the King
Rajaraja Chola building the Tanjore Great
Temple.. and how that book was out of print
now..
He said that with much chagrin.
It need not be out of print is the point.
Because, it need not have gone to print.
It could have been a truly multimedia digital
experience created once, and it will stay
forever.
Won’t it?
The fourth reason, my favourite reason, why
you have to move to the digital world, is
this.
We saw this in Quotidian 441 too.
The Power of Others.
With Others.
For Others.
From Others.
That power.
You remember Amazon Kindle.
It has an amazing feature, where, it will
tell you when you are reading a book, .. “So
many other readers who read this book liked
this particular passage much..
Most of them highlighted this part!”
How special.
How beautiful.
A social feature when reading.
Goodreads — acquired by Amazon- it is a
great place where people recommend books and
booklists..
Selected content from digital books, highlighted,
shared..
I came across a service called Readwise.
A friend recommended that to me.
It digests all the highlights you make, in
any book reader, digital book reader, and
takes them into its mind.
And daily, sends you a random digest of fifteen
chosen little snippets from the stuff that
you have read.
We have encountered this concept earlier too.
If you practice spaced repetition, it will
become permanent in memory.
And, Readwise helps you achieve that!
Not possible with paper books!
And, finally, an amazing service called Bookfusion.
I am a member too.
It is a library.
I have a library of my own with my friends.
So many of the books that we have encountered
in Quotidians till now, waiting there for
friends to share.
And, when they read those books, if they highlight
something, I get a notification.
It is almost as if I read when they read..!
Vicarious, don’t they call it?
When they read it, I too, enjoy that, along
with them.
These things are not possible in the world
of paper.
So, welcome, to the digital world.
As a closing thought, there is this person
named Pablo Neruda.
He is a Nobel Laureate.
Winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature,
in 1971.
He has written a poem…
Sounds a bit angry actually..
When I close a book, I open life.
Book, let me go.
I don’t come out of collected works, My
poems have not eaten poems, Their food is
out of earth and men.
I learned about life from life itself.
Love, I learned in a single kiss..!”
He compares the world of books and the world
as it really is.
The poem is titled, “An Ode to the Book”.
A song of praise, literally.
But, Pablo Neruda, instead of praising the
book, he is a Chilean poet… has ravaged
the concept thus.
Probably there is a message there.
You have to come out of the book and meet
the world front on.
Somebody once said, “He who has never traveled
the world, is stuck in the same page of a
book..”
Go, tour the world!
Alright, we will meet again later today, thank
you!